[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think the hardest part of
investigating the afterlife is
what if the news is bad.
But it's good.
All the news is good.
So do the investigation.
The most important thing it does
I think is take away all fear.
>> That moment was when I
understood that heaven is not
a place, but it's a state.
And whether I chose to
stay there or come back
into the body, now that
I knew what I knew,
I would bring heaven with me.
>> Heaven, Bardo,
Nirvana, the other side.
The enigmatic idea
of life after death
has intrigued humanity
since time immemorial.
There have been
thousands of anecdotes
from around the world describing
an afterlife, the vast majority
of which come from near-death
experiences or NDEs.
From a perception of being
outside one's body to racing
down a dark tunnel towards
a bright white light,
near-death
experiencers frequently
report remarkably
similar occurrences.
Yet are these
accounts proof enough
that our consciousness lives on
after our corporeal form dies,
or are these experiences
merely the result
of a physical process
within a dying brain?
What can evidence
for an afterlife
reveal about the
nature of our reality?
According to a survey
conducted by the International
Association for Near Death
Studies in the US, Australia,
and Germany, anywhere from
4% to 15% of the population
has had a near-death experience.
These numbers have
been replicated
in numerous other surveys.
And interest in NDEs has
grown exponentially of late.
Accounts of
near-death experiences
date back to ancient times.
Modern era research into
near-death experiences
is generally said to
have begun in 1975.
That was the year
Raymond A. Moody, Jr.,
a philosopher
turned psychiatrist,
published "Life After
Life," a groundbreaking
book based on
interviews with some 150
near-death experiences.
In all of the cases
he looked into,
Dr. Moody discovered claims
of startling similarity
with experiences at or
near the moment of death.
>> Near-death experiences are
a common pattern of conscious
experience that occurs to people
who are on the verge of death,
for example in a cardiac
arrest from which they are
resuscitated.
And basically, they
consist of elements that
are common all over the world.
Not every person has
all of the elements.
But among the things
that people say
are that they hear the
doctor say something like,
oh my god, he's
dead, or we've lost
her, which is very
surprising to them
because they say that I have
never felt so alive as when
I heard that doctor
say I was dead, because
from their point
of view, they feel
that they distance themselves
from their physical body.
And they watch the scene
of the resuscitation
typically from the
point of view above it.
As this progresses, they
eventually wake up to the fact
that, oh, this must be
something to do with death.
And at that point they enter
into states of consciousness
that, no matter how
articulate they may be,
they say there are no words for
it, that it's indescribable.
They go through a passageway
into a beautiful light.
They feel comfort,
peace, and joy.
They meet relatives and friends
of theirs who have died.
And they go through
panoramic memory
in which everything
they've ever done
is displayed around them in
a sort of holographic three
dimensional panorama.
And they come back
from these experiences
with a total new
take on life thinking
that the most important thing
we can do while we're here
is to learn how
to love and saying
that they have no
more fear of death,
because they feel
that death is just
a transition into
some other reality.
>> Is this other reality a
hallucination through firing
synapses within the dying brain,
or could it be a literal other
realm accessed by a liberated
consciousness at the moment
of death?
In 2012, Dr. Eben Alexander
published the book
"Proof of Heaven, a
Neurosurgeon's Journey
into the Afterlife."
When several years
earlier his brain
was attacked by a rare
and mysterious bacterium,
he laid motionless in
a coma for seven days.
During that time,
Dr. Alexander claimed
that he went on a journey
beyond this world,
meeting an angelic
being who guided him
back to a divine
source of the universe.
It all started with
54 years of life
working as an academic
neurosurgeon thinking I
understood brain, mind,
and consciousness.
And then 4:30 in the
morning November 10, 2008,
I suddenly became very ill
with a rapidly progressive gram
negative bacterial
meningoencephalitis
that took over my brain.
Within a few hours, drove
me into a state of seizures
deep into coma.
And then I was admitted
to a hospital where
I had worked as a neurosurgeon.
And I spent seven
days in that coma.
My doctors basically thought
I had a 10% chance of survival
early in the week down to
2% by the end of the week
with no chance of recovery.
And that's when I started
coming back to this world.
I had an extraordinary
experience
that by all of
current neuroscience
would be completely
impossible because
of the damage to the human
part of my brain, my neocortex.
And yet it did happen.
And that has been the
basis of this mystery
I've been trying to unravel
for the last nine years.
>> Dr. Alexander is one of
a growing number of highly
credentialed medical
professionals who counter
the arguments of scientists who
attribute the NDE experience
to factors such as oxygen
shortage, imperfect anesthesia,
and the body's neurochemical
responses to trauma.
Specialists like Dr. Alexander
dismiss these explanations
as inadequate.
The medical conditions under
which NDEs happen, they say,
are too varied to explain
a phenomenon that seems
so widespread and consistent.
They believe that the NDE
is a result of consciousness
existing in some non-material
form independent of but closely
connected to the brain.
At the time of death,
they hold, consciousness
is released to
experience another realm.
Regardless of
scientific evidence,
the near-death
experience has repeatedly
been reported to be an
incredibly powerful one, often
leading to profound
revelation and transformation.
>> Well, it all started in
a very primitive, coarse,
unresponsive realm that I
call the earthworm's eye view,
a very, very dark and murky
kind of coarse reality,
like being in dirty jell-o.
Turns out that from
that realm I was rescued
by a slowly spinning
white light, very clear,
that came bundled with a
perfect musical melody.
And that white light
opened up like a rip
in the fabric of that ugly
earthworm eye view realm
and led up into an
ultra-real valley, what
I call the gateway
valley, that was filled
with many Earth-like features.
For example, there was lots
of plant life, lush growing
flowers, blossoming
buds on trees.
No sign of any death or decay.
But that was only
a stepping stone
to higher and higher levels.
And in fact, those angelic
choirs, the music from them
provided yet another portal.
Music, vibration,
frequency are the way
that our souls
transcend these realms.
But it was just an
extraordinary spiritual journey.
And the most amazing
thing, of course,
is that it happened when
my brain was demonstrably
offline, when the neocortex
was known by neurologic exams
and by my scans, my doctors
knew that I could not
have had any kind of
robust experience,
because this was far more
real than anything I've ever
experienced in my existence.
>> So what then does the NDE
reveal about the very nature
of reality?
>> I am completely
confident saying, yeah,
the physical world
is an illusion.
And it makes me sound psychotic.
And that's all right,
because if they haul me
away to a mental
hospital, that's
an illusion too and maybe
a very interesting one.
Right?
I mean we're not putting
the world down by saying
that it's illusory.
This is an illusory narrative
driven thing we're in.
And where I have come
and my thinking about it
is that apparently we
finish this one story,
and then we go through some
incomprehensible process,
and then I gather we're
back on another story line.
>> In 2014, linguist and author
Lisa Smartt created "The Final
Words Project" with
Dr. Raymond Moody.
This investigation
collects accounts
from health care providers,
friends, and family members
of the dying.
Her book, "Words
at the Threshold,"
offers the early findings
of the investigation.
>> So in the words of Steven
Jobs just before he died,
the words were, oh wow.
Oh wow.
>> His words are the ones
that might be most popular.
Many of us have heard but
what's remarkable is bedrooms
or in hospital rooms
throughout the country,
even throughout the
world, words like that
are being heard privately.
People are seeing remarkable
things, oftentimes,
as they leave this world.
>> I love that.
I mean of all the
things he'd seen
in this life, what he had seen
over there was unbelievable.
>> So what is over there?
Does it really exist?
And if so, where?
While much more
scientific study is
required to empirically answer
these questions, what is clear
is that the
near-death experience
is an excellent
vehicle for exploring
the ancient human
belief that we are
more than our physical bodies.
The reality of an
afterlife not only
suggests that there is
more to consciousness
than chemical and electrical
impulses in the brain.
But when the end
of life is upon us,
fear may be an
unwarranted emotion.
Life on this Earth is
precious, yet our passage
into the afterlife
beyond this reality
may truly be a
wonderful journey.
>> I mean to my utter surprise,
there is a life after death.
So don't be afraid of death.
It's not anything
to be scared of.
But stay here as
long as your sentence
is, because when you get out
of here, it will make sense.
[MUSIC PLAYING]